Q.) In which city, National Health Authority (NHA) has recently (in August ‘23) launched India’s first Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission (ABDM) microsite?

1) Bengaluru, Karnataka 
2) Aizawl, Mizoram 
3) Ahmedabad, Gujarat 
4) New Delhi, Delhi
5) Pune, Maharashtra 

Answer- 2) Aizawl, Mizoram 

Explanation: 
On 23rd August 2023, National Health Authority (NHA) launched India’s first Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission (ABDM) microsite in Aizawl, the capital city of Mizoram. With this, Mizoram became the 1st State in India to operationalise ABDM microsite project.
i.Mizoram has appointed Youth for Action as the Interfacing Agency for implementing the ABDM Microsite in Aizawl.
•Microsites are clusters of ABDM-enabled small and medium-scale healthcare facilities, such as clinics, nursing homes, hospitals (with less than 10 beds), laboratories, and pharmacies, offering digital health services to patients like linking the health records generated at these facilities with their Ayushman Bharat Health Accounts (ABHAs).
•These records can be accessed and shared using ABDM-enabled Personal Health Record (PHR)
applications on patients’ phones.

Q.) In August 2023, Union Minister Rajnath Singh, Ministry of Defence (MoD) set up a 9-member committee of experts headed by	, to maintain the Defence Research and Development
Organization (DRDO).  
1) V. K. Saraswat
2) Ajay K. Sood
3)Rajagopala Chidambaram
4)Manjul Bhargava 
5) K Vijay Raghavan

Answer- 5) K Vijay Raghavan 

Explanation:
Union Minister Rajnath Singh, Ministry of Defence (MoD) has set up a 9-member committee of experts to maintain the Defence Research and Development Organization (DRDO). The committee will be headed by Prof K Vijay Raghavan, former Principal Scientific Advisor, Government of India (GoI).
i. The 9-member committee has been tasked with the mission to review and redefine the role of various departments within DRDO and submit a report within 3 months.
Note: Prof Vijay Raghavan was one of the key architects of the National Research Foundation (NRF).